Deleting is also pretty straightforward, in products
here we have our delete product method
and of course there, I also want to send a request, a HTTP request. The URL for that
will be the same URL we used for updating because of course, I want to target an element with a specific
ID and then we can send a delete request here to that URL.
Now you don't need to add any body here and actually you can't because there is no data you would need
to append, you just want to delete the resource at that URL and that's all
and of course now, you can now also use async await here if you want to but you can also do something
which is known as optimistic updating. Here,
I'm executing this and I actually don't await the result,
instead I immediately execute this because as you learned, Dart does not block code execution until this
is done and it simply moves ahead to this line before we have a response from this line and therefore,
it will remove that item from our items list.
Now actually, I'll do something which is totally optional but which is also a pattern you see from time
to time. Before I remove my item here and actually before I start sending the request therefore just
to be safe, I'll copy it.
So I'll create a new final variable, existing product and there, I want to get the first product where
this condition here essentially is true or since I'll need to remove it later,
we can also simply get the index, so maybe get the existing
product index first and we get this with the help of items and then indexWhere
and now use our function here to identify a product.
So this gives us the index of the product we want to remove,
then I'll add my existing product constant here, runtime constant, which is items for that existing product
index.
So with that, I now basically store a reference, a pointer to that product which is about to be deleted
in this constant here and thereafter, I can call items remove at, because I now have the index, existing
product index.
So this will now remove the item from the list but important, not from memory,
it only removes that from the list, the item, the object itself will live on in memory,
Dart would normally clear it from memory if it finds no one who is still interested in the data, which
would normally be the case if you remove it from the list
but here since I stored a reference to the product in existing product, we still have someone interested
in the existing product and therefore, we still keep that product.
We only remove it from the list but in memory, it's still stored and we still have a reference to it
here.
So then I send that delete request and now I'm only interested in when that failed, so we could use async
await but we can also use catch error here and if an error occurred, I'd only care about the error and
I can use an underscore therefore, I just want to roll back the removal here.
So then I will use items and then use insert and insert at my existing product index which is the index
the product was at before and insert my existing product there.
I can do that because existing product,
this constant, holds a reference to the old product, so it will reinsert it into the list
if we failed here. This is optimistic updating because this ensures that I re-add that product
if we fail. Now if we succeed, so in then before catch error, I don't care about the data I get, there
I simply want to set existing product equal to null and therefore, this of course shouldn't be a final,
I'll use var instead, simply to clear up that reference and let Dart remove that object in memory because
now, really no one is interested in it anymore.
So with that, we have that optimistic updating pattern where I roll back if my product deletion should
fail
and of course, I want to notify listeners after that roll back as well.
Now let's see whether that worked and for that, I'll reload my app here and then go to manage products and
in there, let me quickly add a dummy product because I don't want to delete one of the other two products
which are at least a bit more realistic.
So this is a dummy product, let's add it here, save this and I want to delete that,
so the test product here. If I click the trash button here, it's gone and it stays gone
and on Firebase, you see it's not there anymore.
Now let me add an error here,
remove the JSON at the end again,
it's a classic, refresh here
and add another dummy here and now, this should actually fail to be deleted.
So adding of course works but now if we delete this, it should disappear because we're not waiting for that
request to finish, we immediately remove our items and by the way, we would also immediately remove it
if I move that after HTTP delete as you learned because Dart doesn't wait for this to finish before
it runs that. So it will not wait for that and hence it should now remove that but we'll then face an
error and it should be re-added. So let me delete it
but that's not happening.
The logic here is correct,
the only thing is that delete unfortunately does not throw an error if we get an error status code back
from the server.
Now the way the web works is that the server sends back status codes to tell us whether the operations
succeeded or not
and typically you have 200 status code,
most importantly 200 and 201 which signal that everything worked.
You have 300 status codes which signal that you were redirected,
you have 400 status codes, so you have different values there,
just as for 200 and 300, which signal that something went wrong and 500 codes basically do the same
and of course there is some differentiation.
If you want to learn more about that, attached you'll find a list of available status codes and what they
mean and for get requests and also for post requests,
the HTTP package we're using automatically throws an error if we have a status code that is
greater or equal than 400,
so for all these error status codes, it throws an error and we make it into catch error. For delete,
it does not do that and therefore we end up in the then block. I can prove that if I add a response
here which is the value we would get here and I print response, excuse me, not response but response status
code.
If we do that and we try that again, I reload,
I reload, my data is here because it was stored.
If I delete here, then you see 405 is printed,
that's the status code we're getting and that signals that an error occurred.
Now normally again for get and post, the HTTP package would have thrown an error and our code here would've
kicked off, here
that is not happening and therefore I want to throw my own error if that's the case. So we can basically
check if response status code is greater or equal than 400 which
means something went wrong and in that case, I want to throw my own error and not continue with this
code.